Question 1 :  Define Power BI and What are the key components of the Power BI ecosystem? Briefly explain: 
? Power BI Desktop 
? Power BI Service 
? Power BI Mobile 
? Power BI Gateway
ANSWER ;-Power BI is a business analytics and data visualization tool developed by Microsoft that helps organizations connect to multiple data sources, transform data, create interactive reports and dashboards, and share insights across the organization to support data-driven decision-making.
Key Components of the Power BI Ecosystem
1. Power BI DesktopA Windows-based application used to connect to data, clean and transform it using Power Query, and build data models with DAX.Allows users to create interactive reports and visualizations.Reports created in Power BI Desktop are published to the Power BI Service.
2. Power BI Service (PowerBI.com)A cloud-based platform for hosting, sharing, and collaborating on reports and dashboards.Enables users to create dashboards, schedule data refreshes, and share content with others.Supports workspaces, apps, row-level security (RLS), and AI features.
3. Power BI MobileMobile applications available on iOS, Android, and Windows devices.Allows users to view and interact with dashboards and reports on the go.Provides features like alerts, annotations, and offline access to key dashboards.
4. Power BI GatewayActs as a bridge between on-premises data sources and the Power BI Service.Enables scheduled refresh and live queries for on-premises databases such as SQL Server.Ensures secure data transfer without moving data permanently to the cloud.

Question 2 :   Compare the following Power BI visuals: 
? Pie Chart vs Donut Chart 
? Bar Chart vs Column Chart 
When would you prefer one over the other? Give one example for each pair. 

ANSWER;-1?? Pie Chart vs Donut Chart
Pie ChartDisplays data as slices of a circle to show part-to-whole relationships.Best used when there are few categories (2–5).Simple and easy to understand but can become cluttered with many categories.When to use:When you want a quick, straightforward comparison of proportions.
Example:Showing market share (%) of 4 product brands.
Donut ChartSimilar to a pie chart but has a hole in the center.Allows placement of total value or key metric in the center.More visually appealing and slightly easier to read than a pie chart.When to use:When you want to show part-to-whole with an emphasized total.
Example:Displaying sales contribution by product category, with total sales shown in the center.
2?? Bar Chart vs Column Chart
Bar ChartUses horizontal bars.Ideal for long category names and easier category comparison.Better for ranking items.When to use;When comparing many categories or when labels are lengthy.
Example:Comparing profit by product sub-category.
Column ChartUses vertical columns.Best suited for time-based data or showing trends.More intuitive for chronological comparisons.When to use:When analyzing changes over time.
Example:Showing monthly sales trends over a year.

Question 3 :   Explain the significance of: 
? Star schema vs Snowflake schema 
? Primary key vs Foreign key in relationships (Power BI) 
Why is cardinality important? 
ANSWERS;-Star SchemaConsists of one central fact table connected directly to dimension tables.Dimension tables are denormalized.Simpler design, fewer joins, and better performance in Power BI.Easier to understand and maintain.Significance / When to use:Preferred for Power BI and analytical reporting.Improves DAX performance and simplifies relationships.
Example:FactSales connected to DimDate, DimCustomer, DimProduct.
Snowflake SchemaDimension tables are normalized into multiple related tables.Reduces data redundancy but increases complexity.Requires more joins, which can impact performance.Significance / When to use:Useful when dimension tables are very large and highly normalized.More complex to model and harder for business users.
Example:Product ? Sub-Category ? Category stored in separate tables.
Primary KeyA unique identifier in a dimension table.Ensures each row is uniquely identifiable.Used on the “one” side of a relationship.Example:ProductID in the Product dimension
Foreign KeyA column in the fact table that references the primary key.Used on the “many” side of a relationship.Example:ProductID in the Sales fact table.

Question 4 :  Differentiate between: 
? Calculated column vs Measure Also, define Row context and Filter context with simple examples. 
ANSWERS;-Calculated ColumnCalculated row by row when data is refreshed.Stored physically in the model and increases model size.Uses row context by default.Values do not change with slicers or filters (except refresh)Example (Calculated Column):Profit = 'Sales'[Sales] - 'Sales'[Cost]
When to use:For categorization, flags, or columns needed in relationships or slicers.
Measure
Calculated at query time (on the fly).
Not stored in the model ? better performance.
Uses filter context.
Values change dynamically based on slicers and filters.
Example (Measure):Total Profit = SUM('Sales'[Profit])
Row Context
Definition

Row context means DAX evaluates one row at a time, similar to a loop in Excel.Example Discount Amount = 'Sales'[Sales] * 'Sales'[Discount]
Filter ContextDefinitionFilter context is the set of filters applied to a calculation from:Slicers,Visual filters,Rows/columns in a visual,Page or report filters
ExampleTotal Sales = SUM('Sales'[Sales])

Question 5:  What is the difference between a report and a dashboard in Power BI? 
ANSWERS;-Power BI ReportA report is a multi-page, interactive document created in Power BI Desktop.It is built using datasets and data models with rich visuals, slicers, and filters.Users can drill down, drill through, and interact with visuals.Reports are published to the Power BI Service for sharing.
Example:A sales report with multiple pages such as Sales Overview, Region Analysis, and Product Performance.
Power BI DashboardA dashboard is a single-page canvas available only in the Power BI Service.Created by pinning visuals from one or multiple reports.Provides a high-level summary and is less interactive than reports.Supports real-time tiles and alerts.
Example:An executive dashboard showing Total Sales, Profit, Top Region, and KPIs in one view.
Key Differences Summary
Feature Report	Dashboard
Pages	Multiple	Single
Creation	Power BI Desktop	Power BI Service
Interactivity	High (filters, drill)	Limited
Data Sources	One dataset	Multiple datasets
Purpose	Detailed analysis	High-level monitoring
ConclusionUse reports for in-depth data analysis and exploration.Use dashboards for quick insights and executive-level monitoring.

Question 6 :  Using the Sample Superstore dataset: 
? Create a Clustered Bar Chart to display Total Sales by Sub-Category 
? Create a Donut Chart for Sales % by Region 
Provide screenshots of both visuals. 

ANSWERS;-Clustered Bar Chart – Total Sales by Sub-CategoryPurpose:To compare total sales performance across different product sub-categories.
Power BI Fields Used:Axis: Sub-Category,Values: Total Sales (SUM)


Donut Chart – Sales % by RegionPurpose:To visualize the percentage contribution of each region to overall sales.
Power BI Fields Used:Legend: Region,Values: Total Sales (SUM)


Clustered Bar Chart
Insert Clustered Bar Chart
Drag Sub-Category ? Axis
Drag Sales ? Values
Ensure aggregation is Sum

Donut Chart
Insert Donut Chart
Drag Region ? Legend
Drag Sales ? Values
Turn on Data labels (%

Question 7 : Write and apply the following measures: 
? Total Profit = SUM([Profit]) 
? Average Discount = AVERAGE([Discount]) 
Display both in a KPI Card, and use a Line Chart to show profit trend over 
months. Add visuals and DAX formulas.
ANSWERS;-DAX MeasuresCreate the following measures in Power BI ? Modeling ? New Measure:
Total Profit
Total Profit = SUM('Global_Superstore2'[Profit])
Average Discount
Average Discount = AVERAGE('Global_Superstore2'[Discount])

2?? KPI Card Visual
Visual Setup in Power BI
Insert Card visual
Add Total Profit measure
Insert another Card visual
Add Average Discount measure
Format:Currency for Profit,Percentage for Discount

KPI Cards Screenshot:


3?? Line Chart – Profit Trend Over Months
Visual Setup in Power BI
Insert Line Chart
Drag Order Date ? X-Axis
Set date hierarchy to Month
Drag Total Profit ? Values

 Line Chart Screenshot:



4?? What These Visuals Show (Quick Interpretation)
Total Profit KPI highlights overall business profitability.
Average Discount KPI indicates pricing and discounting behavior.
Line chart reveals monthly profit fluctuations and seasonal trends.
Helps identify high-performing months and periods of profit decline.

Question 8 :  
Implement a DAX measure that calculates the percentage of total sales by 
product category. 
Product_category                                                                        Sales_Amount 
Electronics                                                                                              5000
 Clothing                                                                                                  3000 
Home Appliances                                                                                   7000 
Books                                                                                                       2000
Tables & Chairs                                                                                        8000 
Toy                                                                                                             1500 
Sports Equipment                                                                                   1200 
Office Supplies                                                                                        1000
Beauty Products                                                                                     4400 
Garden Supplies                                                                                     1000 
Jewelry                                                                                                    1800 
Automative                                                                                              2600

ANSWERS;-DAX Measure – Percentage of Total Sales by Product Category
Assume:
   Table name: Sales
    Columns:
        Product_category
        Sales_Amount

DAX Formula
% of Total Sales =
DIVIDE(
    SUM(Sales[Sales_Amount]),
    CALCULATE(
        SUM(Sales[Sales_Amount]),
        ALL(Sales[Product_category])
    )
)
Format this measure as Percentage (%) in Power BI

Input Data
Product Category	Sales Amount
Electronics	5000
Clothing	3000
Home Appliances	7000
Books	2000
Tables & Chairs	8000
Toy	1500
Sports Equipment	1200
Office Supplies	1000
Beauty Products	4400
Garden Supplies	1000
Jewelry	1800
Automotive	2600
Total Sales Calculation 5000+3000+7000+2000+8000+1500+1200+1000+4400+1000+1800+2600 =38,500
Expected Output – Percentage of Total Sales
Product Category	Sales Amount	                  % of Total Sales
Electronics	                        5000	                     12.99%
Clothing	                       3000	                      7.79%
Home Appliances	         7000	                     18.18%
Books	                                      2000	                     5.19%
Tables & Chairs	                        8000	                   20.78%
Toy	                                      1500	                   3.90%
Sports Equipment	          1200	                   3.12%
Office Supplies	                        1000	                    2.60%
Beauty Products	          4400	                   11.43%
Garden Supplies	          1000	                  2.60%
Jewelry                                      1800	                 4.68%
Automotive	                      2600	                 6.75%
How to Use This Measure in Power BI
Add Product_category to a Table / Bar / Donut Chart
Add:
Sales_Amount
% of Total Sales
Apply slicers ? percentages update dynamically


Question 9 : 
? Create a DAX Measure for Total Profit 
? Use it in a Waterfall Chart to analyze how different Sub-Categories contribute to 
overall profit 
? Add a Slicer for Region to filter the visual 
? Write brief business insights (4–5 lines) from the chart and provide 2–3 data-driven 
recommendations to improve profit. 
Provide a steps, screenshot of the Waterfall chart and the DAX formula 

ANSWERS;-1?? DAX Measure – Total Profit
Create this measure in Power BI Desktop ? Modeling ? New Measure:
Total Profit = SUM('Global_Superstore2'[Profit])
This measure dynamically recalculates profit based on filters such as Region and Sub-Category.


Business Insights (4–5 Lines)A few sub-categories contribute the majority of total profit, indicating strong product concentration.Certain sub-categories show negative or low profit, pulling down overall profitability.Regional filtering reveals that some sub-categories perform well in specific regions but poorly in others.High sales volume does not always translate to high profit, highlighting margin inefficiencies.Profit volatility across sub-categories suggests pricing and cost optimization opportunities.

5?? Data-Driven Recommendations (2–3)
Review and optimize loss-making sub-categories by adjusting pricing, reducing discounts, or renegotiating supplier costs.
Increase investment in high-profit sub-categories, focusing marketing and inventory efforts where margins are strongest.
Apply region-specific strategies, scaling successful sub-categories from high-performing regions to underperforming ones.

Question 10 :  
Scenario: VitaTrack Wellness, a digital health company in FitZone, has collected data on users’ daily habits and health vitals. The analytics team is tasked with drawing actionable insights from this data to improve lifestyle suggestions and prevent heart-related 
risks. 
Your Task: Using the provided dataset (includes Age, Gender, BMI, Steps, Calories, Sleep, Heart Rate, Blood Pressure, Smoking, Alcohol, Exercise, Diabetic & Heart Disease status): 
Build a one-page Power BI dashboard that answers: 
1. Are users maintaining a balanced lifestyle (Steps, Sleep, Calories) 
2. What lifestyle patterns (Smoking, Alcohol, BMI, etc.) indicate heart disease risk? 
3. Is there any visible relationship between Sleep and Physical Activity? 
4. How does BMI vary across Age Groups and Genders? 
5. What is the impact of smoking and alcohol on heart rate and blood pressure? 
6. Segment people based on their health activity to suggest lifestyle changes

ANSWERS;-Dashboard Objective
To analyze users’ daily habits and health vitals to:
Promote balanced lifestyles
Identify heart-disease risk patterns
Enable early preventive recommendations

Are users maintaining a balanced lifestyle? (Steps, Sleep, Calories)
Recommended Visuals
KPI Cards
     Avg Daily Steps
     Avg Sleep Hours
     Avg Calories Burned
Clustered Column Chart
    X-axis: User Category / Age Group
   Values: Avg Steps, Avg Sleep, Avg Calories

DAX Measures
Avg Steps = AVERAGE(Health[Steps])
Avg Sleep Hours = AVERAGE(Health[Sleep])
Avg Calories = AVERAGE(Health[Calories])
InsightUsers with 7–8 hours sleep and 7k–10k steps show healthier calorie balance.Low activity users often compensate with higher calorie intake.

Lifestyle patterns indicating heart disease risk
Recommended Visuals
Stacked Bar Chart
        Axis: Smoking, Alcohol
       Legend: Heart Disease (Yes/No)
Table
     BMI Category, Smoking, Alcohol, Heart Disease %
Key DAX
Heart Disease Rate =
DIVIDE(
    CALCULATE(COUNTROWS(Health), Health[HeartDisease] = "Yes"),
    COUNTROWS(Health)
)

Insight
Heart disease prevalence is significantly higher among:
Smokers
High BMI individuals
Alcohol consumers with low exercise

Relationship between Sleep and Physical Activity
Recommended Visual
Scatter Chart
      X-axis: Steps
      Y-axis: Sleep Hours
      Size: Calories
      Legend: Heart Disease Status
Insight
Moderate physical activity correlates with better sleep quality
Very high or very low activity shows reduced sleep duration
Poor sleep + inactivity increases heart risk

BMI variation across Age Groups and Gender
Recommended Visuals
Clustered Column Chart
       X-axis: Age Group
      Values: Avg BMI
     Legend: Gender
     Slicer: Gender
DAX
Avg BMI = AVERAGE(Health[BMI])

Insight
BMI increases with age, especially after 40+
Male users show higher BMI variance
Female BMI stabilizes with consistent activity

Impact of Smoking & Alcohol on Heart Rate and Blood Pressure
Recommended Visuals
Clustered Bar Chart
      Axis: Smoking / Alcohol
     Values: Avg Heart Rate
 Line or Bar Chart
         Values: Avg Blood Pressure

DAX Measures
Avg Heart Rate = AVERAGE(Health[HeartRate])
Avg Blood Pressure = AVERAGE(Health[BloodPressure])

Insight
Smokers have higher resting heart rate and BP
Alcohol consumers show elevated BP even with moderate activity
Combined smoking + alcohol is the highest risk group

Health Activity Segmentation for Lifestyle Suggestions
Calculated Column – Health Segment
Health Segment =
SWITCH(
    TRUE(),
    Health[Steps] >= 8000 && Health[Sleep] >= 7, "Active & Healthy",
    Health[Steps] < 5000 && Health[Sleep] < 6, "Sedentary & High Risk",
    "Moderately Active"
)
Recommended Visual
Donut Chart
        Legend: Health Segment
       Values: Count of Users

Usage
Enables personalized lifestyle recommendations
Helps wellness team target high-risk groups

Final Dashboard Layout (One Page)
Section                                                                                	Visual
Top KPIs	                                                         Steps, Sleep, Calories
Lifestyle Balance	                                                  Column Chart
Heart Risk Factors	                                                 Stacked Bar
Sleep vs Activity	                                                  Scatter Plot
BMI Analysis	                                                     Column by Age & Gender
Smoking & Alcohol Impact	                                  Bar Charts
User Segmentation	                                              Donut Chart
Filters	                                                                       Age Group, Gender
Key Business Insights
Balanced sleep and activity significantly reduce heart-risk indicators.
Smoking and alcohol sharply elevate heart rate and blood pressure.
BMI is a strong predictor of heart disease, especially in older users.
Sedentary users show overlapping risk factors across vitals.

Actionable Recommendations
Push personalized alerts for users with low sleep and activity.
Target smoking & alcohol users with heart-risk prevention programs.
Promote step-based challenges to move users into “Active & Healthy” segment.
